Welcome to the
introduction to the lesson
on the Java fork-join pool.
In this part of the
lesson, I'll explain
how the Java fork-join
framework can be used
to process tasks in parallel.
We've talked about the
Java fork-join pool before,
but we've really
never had a chance
to do a deep dive on all of
its structure and functionality
and APIs.
So that's what we're
going to do now.
The Java fork-join pool
provides a high-performance,
fine-grained, object-oriented
task execution framework
for Java data parallelism.
As we've mentioned before,
the parallel computing engine
it provides is used by the
other higher-level parallels
and frameworks we're
covering in Java.
Fork-join pool supports a
style of parallel programming
that is typically used to solve
problems by divide and conquer.
Although, there are other
ways you can use it.
But this is the most common way.
The way this problem
approach works
is you solve a big
problem by checking
to see if the problem
is small enough,
and then solving
it directly using
some type of
sequential algorithm.
And if you don't have
a small enough problem,
then you take the big
problem and you break it
up into independent parts,
perhaps splitting it
in half each time.
There are other
approaches as well.
And then you go ahead
and fork new sub-tasks
to solve each part.
You let those parts
all run in parallel.
You then join the
sub-tasks, and you
compose a final result
from the composition,
or the merging or combination
of the sub-results.
And that should sound pretty
familiar by this point.
We've talked about
this type of approach
over and over again
when we've been talking
about parallel streams--
which, not surprisingly,
uses fork-join pool
to do its dirty work.
Here's a more effective
way of thinking
about this based on
the paradigm we've
been talking about
with splitting,
applying, and combining.
So the fork-join pool splits
a task into sub-tasks.
The task create
sub-tasks by forking.
When a sub-task is
forked, it typically
splits itself into
more sub-tasks,
if the work is still
sufficiently big.
And you only stop splitting when
you get things small enough.
Once you've gotten things
split up into their atomic size
units, then those sub-tasks
are applied in parallel.
This is implemented
by a combination
of layers in the Java
platform, including
the Java fork-join framework,
the Java execution environment,
the operating system
kernel, and of course,
the underlying
hardware that really
does all the hard lifting.
Sub-tasks that are split
by the splitting phase
can run in parallel
on different cores.
And as you might
expect, obviously,
the more cores, the
better the performance,
depending on certain
characteristics.
We've talked about when
to use parallelism,
when not to use parallelism.
So as a general rule, the
more cores and the more things
run independently and the
more data, the bigger the win
is going to be by applying
parallel computing.
Interesting enough,
a sub-task could also
run concurrently in
different threads
that map to a single core.
This is, of course, not the
preferred configuration.
In fact, it's increasingly
a next-to-impossible
configuration, because nobody
sells single core processors
anymore for the most part.
But this configuration might
not enhance performance,
unless of course the
sub-tasks are highly I/O bound
and you've got I/O hardware
that can do the I/O in parallel
with the central CPU and so on.
And then the final phase, as
we've seen over and over again,
is to combine the
various sub-task results.
And the interesting
thing about the way
that the fork-join framework
works is that join logically
waits for sub-tasks to finish.
But it actually pitches
in and plays a role
in executing sub-tasks as well.
And I'll talk more about
this in an upcoming lesson
when we talk about
some of the key methods
in the fork-join task class.
As sub-tasks finish, then
the results are merged.
And they're merged
by joining together
the results from
sub-tasks that run
in the background
in other threads.
These partial sub-results
are all merged together
into a final result.
So there could be
multiple phases
of joining at different
levels of abstraction,
depending on how you've
decomposed your program up
into pieces.
But the end result
is you'll end up
with a final joined
result that has the result
of the overall processing.
A join always occurs at a single
thread at any given level.
So a join will join the
results from its children.
A parent will join
And as a result,
there's no need to have
any type of synchronizers
in the code for the joining.
Unless, of course, you're
accessing some other shared
mutable state in
some way, then you
would need the synchronizers.
But if you're just trying to get
the results back from joining,
then you don't need to worry
about synchronization at all.